---
layout: "page"
title: "Articles"
category: meta
---


# Scholarly (and otherwise) papers on omorfi

This is a collection of scientific work describing or using omorfi. If you find
something is missing, please notify us on the google groups or other means.

To get BibTeX or other formats of citations, feel free to use the [google
scholar](http://scholar.google.com) system.

# Papers about omorfi #

Following works can be used when citing omorfi. In support of reproducible
research in NLP, include details about exact version you used, e.g., a footnote
containing URL of omorfi repository and the version tag on releases page (or git
short hash, if you used development version).

1. **Tommi A Pirinen (2015)**  *Development and Use of Computational Morphology
   of Finnish in the Open Source and Open Science Era: Notes on Experiences with
   Omorfi Development*, in SKY Journal of Linguistics (28), ISSN: 1456-8438
1. **Tommi A Pirinen (2015)** [Omorfi—Free and open source morphological lexical
   database for
   Finnish](http://www.ep.liu.se/ecp_article/index.en.aspx?issue=109;article=044)
   in Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics,
   NODALIDA 2015.
1. **Tommi A Pirinen (2011)** _Modularisation of Finnish Finite-State Language
   Description—Towards Wide Collaboration in Open Source Development of
   Morphological Analyser_ in Proceedings of Nodalida 2011 (18).
1. **Tommi Pirinen (2008)**, _Suomen kielen äärellistilainen automaattinen
   morfologinen analyysi avoimen lähdekoodin menetelmin_, Master's Thesis,
   University of Helsinki (in Finnish)

[Google scholar for newest
article](https://scholar.googleusercontent.com/scholar.bib?q=info:fxGGWPCvicYJ:scholar.google.com/&output=citation&scisig=AAGBfm0AAAAAWATeN0q80XUXEBqhJ3V7aqAYj2cDAzLz&scisf=4&ct=citation&cd=-1&hl=fi)
and corresponding bibtex:

```bibtex
@article{pirinen2015development,
  title={Development and Use of Computational Morphology of Finnish in the Open
Source and Open Science Era: Notes on Experiences with Omorfi Development.},
  author={Pirinen, Tommi A},
  journal={SKY Journal of Linguistics},
  volume={28},
  pages={381--393},
  year={2015}
}
```

# Papers using omorfi #

This list is most likely not complete, please suggest additions (or removals) if you have any.

## Machine Translation

1. **Raphael Rubino, Tommi Pirinen, Miquel Esplà-Gomis, Nikola Ljubešić, Sergio Ortiz Rojas, Vassilis Papavassiliou, Prokopis Prokopidis and Antonio Toral** (2015), _Abu-MaTran at WMT 2015 Translation Task: Morphological Segmentation and Web Crawling_ at WMT2015
1. **Lane Schwartz, Bill Bryce, Chase Geigle, Sean Massung, Yisi Liu, Haoruo Peng, Vignesh Raja, Subhro Roy and Shyam Upadhyay** (2015), _The University of Illinois submission to the WMT 2015 Shared Translation Task_ at WMT2015
1. **Jörg Tiedemann, Filip Ginter and Jenna Kanerva** (2015) _Morphological Segmentation and OPUS for Finnish-English Machine Translation_ at WMT2015
1. **Ann Clifton, Anoop Sarkar (2011)**. _Combining morpheme-based machine
   translation with post-processing morpheme prediction_, in Proceedings of
   the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
   Human Language Technologies, ACL 2011.
1. **Ann Clifton, Anoop Sarkan**, _Morphology Generation for Statistical Machine
   Translation_
1. **Ann Clifton (2010)**. _Unsupervised Morphological Segmentation For
   Statistical Machine Translation_ Doctoral dissertation, Simon Fraser
   University.

## Universal Dependencies, syntax, treebanking

1. **Sampo Pyysalo** (2015) _Universal Dependencies for Finnish_, In: Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics NODALIDA
1. **Jenna Kanerva** et al. (2014), _Syntactic n-gram collection from a large-scale corpus of internet Finnish_, Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference Baltic HLT.
1. **Bernd Bohnet, Joakim Nivre, Igor Boguslavsky, Filip Ginter and Jan Hajič**
  (2013), _Joint Morphological and Syntactic Analysis for Richly Inflected
  Languages_ in Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics
1. **Kristiina Muhonen, Tanja Purtonen (2012)**, _Rule-Based Detection of
   Clausal Coordinate Ellipsis_ in LREC 2012
1. **Kristiina Muhonen, Tanja Purtonen (2012)**, _Detecting Semantic Ambiguity:
   Alternative Readings in Treebanks_
1. **Mozgovoy, Maxim** (2010) _Extensible dependency grammar for education: ideas and experiments_, J Converg (JoC) 1.1

## OCR

1. **Silfverberg, Miikka, and Jack Rueter** (2015) _Can Morphological Analyzers Improve the Quality of Optical Character Recognition?._ in: First International Workshop of Computational Linguistics for Uralic Languages, Septentrio Conference Series. No. 2, 2015.

## Semantic Web

1. **Eetu Mäkelä**. (2014) _Combining a rest lexical analysis web service with sparql for mashup semantic annotation from text_. In: The Semantic Web: ESWC 2014 Satellite Events.
1. **Reetta Sinkkilä, O. Suominen, E. Hyvönen (2011)**, _Automatic semantic subject
   indexing of web documents in highly inflected languages_, The Semantic Web:
   Research and …, 2011
1. **E. Ahonen, Eero Hyvönen (2009)**, _Publishing Historical Texts on the
   Semantic Web-A Case Study_, in Semantic Computing, 2009. ICSC'09.

## Spell-Checking

1. **Tommi A Pirinen** (2014), _Weighted Finite-State Methods for
  Spell-Checking and Correction_, PhD thesis
1. **Tommi A Pirinen** (2014), _State-of-the-Art in Weighted
   Finite-State Spell-Checking_, in CICLing 2014, proceedings in LNCS
1. **Tommi A Pirinen, Sam Hardwick (2012)**, _Effect of Language and Error
   Models on Efficiency of Finite-State Spell-Checking and Correction_, in
   Proceedings of 10th International Workshop on Finite-State Methods
   and/in Natural Language Processing FSMNLP 2012
1. **Tommi A Pirinen, Miikka Silfverberg (2012)**, _Improving Finite-State
   Spell-Checker Suggestions with Part-of-Speech N-grams_ in Proceedings of
   International Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational
   Linguistics CICLING 2012
1. **Miikka Silfverberg, Mirka Hyvärinen, Tommi A Pirinen (2011)**,
   _Improving Predictive Entry of Finnish Text Messages using IRC Logs_ in
   Proceedings of the Computational Linguistics-Applications Conference 2011.

for further results, see http://scholar.google.fi/scholar?q=omorfi
